This project presents a novel machine learning approach to enhance the detection and prediction of foodborne illness outbreaks, a significant public health challenge that affects millions annually. I developed a dual-model system that combines historical CDC outbreak data as well as human-reviewed social media data derived from Twitter, using a random forest classifier to predict outbreak risks. The CDC data was obtained from Kaggle and the Twitter data was obtained upon request from researchers at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The model uses multiple data features including location, establishment type, food categories, and temporal data, with hospitalization rates and location-based variables emerging as the strongest predictors. The data preprocessing process involved handling categorical variables through label encoding and converting temporal features into compatible data types. The model achieved an AUC-ROC score of 0.72 (a metric to measure binary classification performance) and an average F1-score of ~0.85 (a metric calculated by the harmonic mean of precision and recall). This machine learning approach can detect potential outbreaks 3-7 days faster than traditional surveillance methods, with reductions of up to 11 days. This acceleration in detection time could allow for prediction and early intervention, potentially reducing the scope and impact of foodborne illness outbreaks. The model’s success and accuracy demonstrate the potential of using machine learning in epidemiology to enhance public health.
